far too many Palestinians have been
killed far too many have suffered these
past weeks the words of US Secretary of
State Anthony blinken but who looks
after those who are still alive in the
middle of the Israel Hamas war zone my
guest this week is Juliet tumor who
speaks for anra the UN Agency for
Palestinian refugees so far more than a
hundred of their personnel have been
killed in the Gaza conflict what we're
seeing in Gaza right now now is
unprecedented on a number of levels so
how long can the agency go on
functioning how long can ordinary people
suffer the intense bombardment the acute
shortages of basic Goods the lack of
medical care how do the people of Gaza
live today when they have no idea if
they'll Die
[Music]
Tomorrow Juliet tumor welcome to
conflict Zone good to have
you thanks for having me Tim thanks for
having me a week ago Israel's ambassador
to the UN denied that there was any kind
of humanitarian crisis in Gaza what
would you say to him look way before
this war in Gaza started on the 7th of
October the humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip has been very very dire I
mean only at anra we were providing food
assistance to 1.2 million people the
levels of poverty were among the highest
in the region so were the levels of
unemployment and then Gaza let's not
forget them was under blockade so access
in and out of the Gaza Strip was very
very difficult now where we are right
now is a humanitarian situation was made
far far worse due to a very tight Siege
and a brutal War because of the
bombardment and the strike that have
been going on for five weeks now so a
humanitarian situation was made far
worse we are witnessing a humanitarian
tragedy in Gaza made far worse every day
this war goes on how much Faith Can you
put in official statements either from
Israel or from
Hamas what I do know are facts on the
ground what we do have at Andra is
nearly 800,000 people who were forced to
flee their homes they are now taking
shelter in more than 150 anra facilities
this is more than four times what we had
planned for under a worst case scenario
the situation in these shelters is
absolutely absolutely terrible because
they are overcrowded and also because
anra does not have the supplies or the
fuel uh to reach people in need need so
their situation is terrible and they are
under bombardment and Gaza the Hall of
Gaza has been under siege for five weeks
now we do not have the ability to
respond to this volume this huge volume
of humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip
also because we are not getting the
supplies that we need and we're not
getting the fuel well I want to come on
to that a little later but can you
believe the casualty figures coming from
the Hamas run Authority in Gaza the
figure I'm I'm thinking of is over
11,000 people dead in the war so far can
you believe these figures I tell you
what when we look at the casualty
figures among our teams among the Andra
teams we can confirm that 102 colleagues
of ours have been killed in in this war
this is the highest number of un Aid
workers ever killed anywhere in the
world since the establishment of the
United Nations and when we apply the
proportionality of this 102 to the
13,000 colleagues that work with us and
when we look at the data coming from the
Gaza Ministry of Health and apply a
similar ratio the numbers do tally now
yesterday we had globally around the
world the United Nations entities around
the world we lowered the flag to half
mast in recognition to the service of
these colleagues that were killed the
only place we kept the UN flag flying
high was Gaza and it was a symbolic
gesture on Andra side to show commitment
to the people that we serve especially
those 800,000 people who came to our
shelters to seek protection and safety
under the very same flag the Personnel
working for anra who were killed they
must have known the dangers that face
them the risks they were running what
kind of people will put their lives on
the line like that for other people you
see Andra has 13,000 uh employees
working with us on the ground in the
Gaza Strip until the war started we were
present across the gala strip North
Middle area Southern areas and these
were mainly teachers um the vast
majority of our teams on the ground are
teachers who teach in unra schools which
we sadly had to close this deprived more
than 300,000 boys and girls in Gala from
education for the past five weeks and we
had to turn many of our schools into
shelters to to take in people who sought
protection and safety under the UN flag
these were people who were the the the
colleagues skilled I mean they were
mainly teachers School principles
doctors nurses Engineers support staff
which is the backbone uh of of our
operation many some killed with their
families weren't they most of them were
killed you're absolutely right Tim most
of them were killed with their families
um we have horrific stories one
colleague of our Samir was killed in his
own home with his wife and eight
children another colleague of our Serene
who was a gynecologist she was killed
with her daughter while she was at at
home onethird of our colleagues who were
killed were not killed in the north
onethird of our colleagues who were
killed were in fact killed in the middle
areas and in the southern areas where
it's supposed to be safe where the
Israelis said they weren't going to bomb
because nowhere is safe te in Gaza
nowhere not the north not Gaza City not
the middle areas and not the South and
in fact when we look at the data more
than 60 un facilities under facilities
specifically the vast majority of which
are shelters where people are Sheltering
60 of those facilities have been hit
more than 10 of those
have been directly hit and
70% of the facilities that were impacted
during this war in Gaza the unra
facility 70% were in the middle areas
and in the southern areas 70% do you
reach a stage where you simply have to
pull out because the danger to your
staff is so great I asked because one of
your colleagues said the other day every
day you think it is the worst day and
then the next day comes and it's even
worse is that your experience they're
absolutely right they're absolutely
right it's not every day it's not only
every day I think every hour the
situation gets worse and worse the
fluidity of of this war is astonishing
things continue to change things
continue to move and a very very fast
pace people continue to leave their
homes there is forc displacement
happening in Gaza there is collective
punishment happening in Gaza Andra is
committed to stay in Gaza and to deliver
to the people who need us most and we
will continue to do this but we need
many things for us to to do this we need
supplies coming into Gaza on a regular
basis we need to expand the number of
trucks that are coming into Gaza we need
to expand that humanitarian operation
both in terms of the volume volume and
the frequency and the predictability of
that humanitarian operation we also need
fuel it's really really critical that
Andra gets fuel for humanitarian
purposes we have not received fuel for
the past five weeks we have been
pleading to get shipments of fuel and to
date we have not received any fuel and
fuel we need for the fleet of the cars
for us to be able to go pick up the
supplies that are coming from the
borders for us to give to medical
facilities our own included for the
water pumps to work in our shelters we
need fuel and we have not received any
fuel Gaza has not received a liter of
fuel since the War Began on the 7th of
October for obvious reasons there's a
particular focus on the plight of
hospitals in Gaza the Red Cross said
they'd reached what they called the
point of no return and that the lives of
thousands of people were at risk this is
a a daily even hourly emergency isn't it
oh absolutely to get what what what
medicine you can what little medicine is
left to get what little fuel there is to
get what little drinking water there is
um how long can this go on for
before before people get ill from
malnutrition before there's illnesses
associated with lack of
Sanitation uh how long before before
that happens look civilian facilities
including hospitals but also un
facilities have not been spared and
these facilities civilian facilities
schools hospitals clinics shelters un
premises and compounds they are all
protected under International
humanitarian law and they have not been
so rules of the war they have been
broken in the Gaza stet the Israelis say
that the reason reason they are
surrounding alifa Hospital which I think
is the largest hospital in in Gaza at
the moment is because they're sure that
there's a command and control center
belonging to Hamas underneath the
hospital itself do you know anything
about that I tell you what we do know
shifa hospital is the largest medical
facility and the largest hospital in the
Gaza Strip and one of the oldest
Palestinian Health institutions
it has been established in
1946 and in addition to it being this
medical facility a very important and
critical medical facility since the War
Began shifa hospital has been hosting
tens of thousands according to reports
that we get tens of thousands of people
in its Courtyards and in in its parking
lot so it's also being used as a shelter
now we at onra have been able to access
shifa Hospital only once and deliver
medical supplies basic medical supplies
and Medicine throughout the war we were
allowed only once to do this very urgent
humanitarian delivery that we did with
the World Health Organization and this
shows you the immense challenges that we
are facing in terms of access not only
from outside of Gaza to bring in
supplies but also within Gaza to move
from the south into to the north where
there is Gaza City where it has been the
Beating Heart of the Gaza Strip for many
many decades but there has been some
evidence in the past that Hamas did hide
weapons and tunnels under hospitals
hasn't there last year your agency said
it had identified what it called a
man-made cavity underneath the grounds
of a school in Gaza it protested to the
Hamas authorities and you sealed the
cavity permanently
how did Hamas respond to your Discovery
so what Andra do every quarter Tim is
that we have inspection teams that go to
all our facilities in the G STP and
everywhere in the region where un
operates and we do this inspection
against um the humanitarian principle
and for neutrality and in fact the last
inspection we have done was just before
the war on the 30th of September we do
this every quarter 30th of September we
have completed the inspection of all our
facilities in the Gaza stet November
13th the Israeli Army showed pictures of
guns suicide vests grenades explosives
in what they said was the basement of
rantisi Children's Hospital does that
surprise you then given what you've just
told me about the inspections you you uh
conducted I saw these um reports Tim and
un is not at all in a position to
confirm or deny these reports R hospital
is not an unwa facility and let me
emphasize that civilian infrastructure
wherever they are in the world not only
in the Gaza Strip civilian
infrastructure must never be used for
military
purposes are you satisfied it isn't
being used in Gaza I really do not know
that uh Tim I really do not know that
you've been in other War zones you've
been in Iraq you've been in
Yemen what stands out about this one
from your the experiences you've had to
date well I spent most of my
humanitarian service working on one of
the most brutal Wars in recent history
and that is the war in Syria where I
worked in and out of Syria on the Syria
War for more than a decade and I thought
that I have seen the worst during that
war because I started working on the war
in Syria in 2012 When The War had just
started and I saw Horrors and I was I
witnessed terrible things happening
including to children because I was
working for Unicef back back then and I
worked in different roles uh with other
entities in the UN so I I'm very
familiar with the war in Syria and I was
very familiar with what wars do to lives
of human
beings well let me ask you about that
because because in your experience what
happens to people who go through this
kind of
trauma what what can we expect to happen
to the people of Gaza do they ever
recover what we're seeing in Gaza right
now is unprecedented on a number of
levels The Siege is unprecedented the
level of damage to the civilian
infrastructure including ton facilities
is
unprecedented the number of casualties
is very very high the number of
colleagues that were killed who work for
anra is very very high in fact it's the
highest ever since the UN started
working towards the mid
1940s the challenges that we are facing
as the largest humanitarian providers in
the Gaza Strip are
unprecedented it's unprecedented on all
levels the shock and the trauma that
this is causing to people including our
own colleagues is huge these are scars
that are going to be very very hard to
heal and there are many many people in
the Gaza Strip who are either
reliving the trauma of
1948 or they are now living the traumas
of their ancestors and their father
fathers and their mothers due to this
forced displacement and the resemblance
of The Exodus of what's happening right
now to the nakba in 1948 also known as
the
catastrophe winter is here do you have
any idea what will happen to the
hundreds of thousands of people who are
now homeless and and in the in the
longer term are there any models that
could suggest how long people might have
to deal with this homelessness with
these
shortages with all the problems that
affect their daily
life winter rain and the cold is going
to make a tragic situation for people in
Gaza far far
worse because what we have had until
recently is in our shelters is women and
girls sleeping inside classrooms and men
and boys sleeping outside in the open so
with winter it's going to get worse and
we are of course worried about the
diseases the spread of diseases the lack
of heat the flooding uh with the Civil
Service breaking down how is this going
to be managed it's going to be even
bigger over a chaos than we have right
now so this is why it's absolutely
critical that there is a humanitarian
ceasefire which we've been calling for
for weeks on end now sadly it's falling
on deaf ears it has to happen for the
sake of civilians wherever they are
including those in Gaza you've just got
back recently from an Arab Summit in the
Saudi Capital Riad report suggested
there was plenty of anger and invective
but I suppose anger is cheap who amongst
the Arab leaders promised any concrete
help at all for the Palestinians in Gaza
so for us at Andre it was a historic
moment because it was the first time in
the history of the agency and we're
almost 75 years old that we are invited
at the level of our commissioner General
to brief and to address the heads of
States both of the Arab world and the
Muslim world so for us it was important
that we relay the message on behalf of
the 2 million Palestinians who are
trapped in this war so that was one
thing that we wanted to relay and in
terms of the reception we got funding
for our operations from Oman and from
the hashimite kingdom of Jordan and we
got pledges from the UAE we are still
not certain them if we are as an agency
going to be able to pay salaries for the
staff not this month November or not
December including those unsigned Heroes
that are working with the agency on the
front lines in the Gaza Strip the head
of your agency said the other day there
was a feeling among gazans that they had
been sacrificed and abandoned by the
outside world how widespread is that
feeling among the people that you've met
and you've talked to very widespread
very widespread it's among our staff and
it's also among the friends that we have
in Gaza and there is feeling of
Abandonment and there's a feeling of um
not feeling equal that the the suffering
and the the Carnage that is happening in
Gaza is not
important um and that is changing which
is very very good I think more and more
and more people around the world are
understanding that civilians are going
through hell in Gaza
and that they are going through a
collective punishment that so many
people have been killed including
according to reports more than 4,000
children which is according to save the
children the highest number of children
killed in any conflict since
2019 these children have nothing to do
with this conflict or with this war and
no child should have witnessed what the
children of Gaza have witnessed have
Palestinians that that you've met talk
to you about the atrocities that Hamas
committed against
Israel yes they have what do they say
what do they say about that yes they
have and Andra and the Secretary General
of the United Nations have condemned in
the strongest terms the massacre that
happened in Israel on the 7th of October
Juliet tumor what will you take away
from all this how do you how do you
process what you've seen how hard is
that for you personally for me it's um
determination to continue to be the
voice of the Palestinian people in Gaza
the civilians who are caught up in this
war and also to continue to work with
our colleagues with our teams on the
ground who are by the way and it's not a
gimmick that that I am using they are a
rare ray of light coming out of the
darkness of what Gaza has become it's my
duty to continue to support them so that
they continue to be able to deliver to
people who need them most so that we
continue as the largest UN agency to
support and deliver the people that we
are committed to deliver to and these
are the Palestinian communities in Gaza
and elsewhere in this
region the head of your agency says that
since October the 7th Gaza has gone from
open air prison to
graveyard if he's right what kind of
Gaza do you think will be
left okay it is hard to answer this
question while you have an active
conflict
going what we do know from destruction
from footage that we've seen of
Destruction including around our own
office which was in Gaza City since we
started working more than 70 years ago
by the way is the place looks like it's
just been hit by an earthquake except we
have to remind ourselves that this is
all
man-made and it's going to
take probably years and years to rebuild
but the concern right now is not for the
brick and stone the huge concern right
now is for the people and what they are
going through and the mass displacement
and the ongoing Exodus and the force
displacement and the collective
punishment that's really the biggest
biggest concern that the agency I work
with has your director said a new
generation of agreed
Palestinians are likely to come out of
the bombing of
Gaza and are likely to continue the
cycle of violence do you share that
view what I do know from other conflicts
is that violence breeds more violence
and violence will never never ever get
us anywhere good and what we do know is
the more violence continues the more the
war continues the farther we are from
peace and stability in this region this
is exactly why we call for a
humanitarian
ceasefire and why do you think it's
falling on De
ears that's not a question to meet him
it's not a question to me you know the
region you talk to the players
I don't know all I know is that the
longer this goes
on the more we're losing on our
Humanity it's for the sake of humanity
it's a point of make or break for each
and every one of us about our Humanity
do we regain it or do we just let it
slip Julia thanks very much for being on
conflict
Zone thank you Tim appreciate your time
thank
[Music]
[Applause]
you